 
 
Dendrometer 
 
 ECOMATIK GmbH 
 Muenchner Str. 23 
 D-85221 Dachau/Germany 
 Tel.: +49  8131 260 738 
 Fax: +49  8131 260 736 
 e-mail: info@ecomatik.de 
 website: www.ecomatik.de 
 
 
Fruit Dendrometer  
(Type DF5) 
For continuous measurements of diameter of  
fruit and vegetables 
 
 
User Manual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 01/2023 
 
 

Fruit Dendrometer – Type DF5                                                                             
        
 
 
 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
Thank you for purchasing an Ecomatik Dendrometer type DF5. This is a sensor for continuous 
measurements of extra small fruit and vegetable diameter under both indoor and outdoor con-
ditions. 
This manual is written to help you install and operate your DF5 dendrometer with least difficul-
ty and for most desirable results. Please read it carefully before installing the sensor, and refer 
to it if you should have any difficulty with the sensor in the future. 
The dendrometer is the sensor part of a measuring system. This means that the dendrometer 
should be connected to a data logger for continuous data recording. The dendrometer is com-
patible with the most types of data loggers and microcontrollers (i.a. Arduino). 
 
2. Product Description  
As shown below, the DF5 dendrometer consists of: 
1x Sensor with quick-mount fruit gripper hook, 5 m cable 
1x Piece re-usable UV-resistant rubber reusable to fix the sensor cable at the branch/stem for 
strain relief (rubber cord may also be delivered as separate part of a bulk delivery. Then the 
total length may be delivered in one piece on a roll and).  
1x Piece re-usable string cord to hang sensor to release the instrumented fruit from additional 
sensor weight.  
2x Cable strips to fix string cord to fruit carrying branch (for correct installation of the strips 
please refer to the below section “Installation”)  
 
   
  
DF5 Fruit Dendrometer 
The standard cable length is 5 m. if you ordered cable extension, the cable length is the or-
dered extension + 5 m. 
 
3. Safety Information 
The sensor is protected from rain water, but it is not sealed. Please do not immerse the sensor 
in water. Avoid any tension between the cable and sensor during handling and operation. 
Pay attention to connections to data logger. Wrong connections will provide wrong readings. 
Max. measurement range 11 mm until maintenance required, exceedance may cause 
sensor damage! 
Fruit Dendrometer – Type DF5                                                                             
        
 
 
 
2 
 
4. Installation  
Tools & accessories:  
- light resistant rubber cord for strain relief of the sensor cable. 
- string cord to hang sensor on fruit carrying branch to release the instrumented fruit from 
additional sensor weight 
- 2x cable strips to fix string cord to fruit carrying branch 
- Additional tools required: scissors for cutting cords 
a)  Select a representative fruit for instrumentation. 
b)  Use the included rubber cord to strain relief the sensor by fixing the sensor cable on the fruit 
carrying branch. Please leave enough cable between the fixation point on the branch and the 
sensor. In the final installation position, the fruit sensor should be able to move freely with the 
instrumented fruit, without tension on the cable. 
c) Use the included string cord to hang the sensor at the fruit carrying branch and adjust the 
positioning such that the sensor in its final installation position does not exert additional 
weight to the instrumented fruit.  
IMPORTANT:  
- Please mind orientation of the sensor such that rod entrance, as well as wire outlet should 
hence always be inclined downwards. 
- Please do not tie the string cord directly to the branch to avoid strangulating the branch. To 
fix the string cord to the branch you may either use the included cable strips, loosely fixed to 
the branch, or the elastic rubber cord and tie the string cord to the fixed strips, or the rubber 
cord respectively.  
d)  Untighten the knurled-head nuts such that the fruit gripper hook can be moved. 
e)  Open sensor clamping system and carefully insert the fruit between the fruit gripper hook 
and the sensor piston.  
f) Move the dendrometer body along the sliding rail, so that the sensor rod is pushed in by 
about 3 to 4 mm and the fruit is firmly clamped between fruit gripper hook and sensor rod. 
Then lock the gripper hook at the desired position by firmly tightening the two knurled-head 
nuts.  
g) Fix the cable onto the stem or on a ground stake for strain relief of the sensor cable between 
instrumented plant and data logger. This can be done using a rope or cable straps. There 
should be no tension between the sensor, fixation point at the fruit carrying branch and the 
remaining sensor cable.  
 
!! IMPORTANT !!  
Fix the cable onto the tree stem/branch so that the sensor is protected from any a cci-
dental pull/ drag of the entire cable length. This can be done using a  rope or cable 
straps. In addition, there should be no tension between the sensor and cable.  
Ensure that no rain water can run along the cable, or the sensor rod and enter the sen-
sor casing. Rod entrance, as well as wire outlet should hence always be incl ined 
downwards. 
 
 
Fruit Dendrometer – Type DF5                                                                             
        
 
 
 
3 
 
5. Wiring and Logger Configuration 
The dendrometer is compatible with most data loggers and microcontrollers (i.a. Arduino). 
This section provides required information for wiring the sensor in to a data logger and con-
vert raw data from volts into micrometers. Please contact us if you require further information 
or assistance.  
Recommended is a logger measurement resolution of at least 12 bits and a switched (power 
up < 100 msec), stable, regulated excitation voltage (Vex) output to supply the dendrometer 
in the voltage range of 0.5 to 10VDC.  
 
4-wire connection 
(cable type: 4-wires + shield) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An interval 0.5-hour for data collection can reveal the diurnal course of diameter changes very 
well. 
 
In the following we describe the connection with Dendrometer Logger (DL18), Campbell Log-
ger (CR1000). Please contact us if your logger is not described here. 
 
Dendrometer Data Logger (DL18) 
The DL18 is a battery powered, waterproof logger for connecting 4 dendrometers. It is a very 
effective data logger for dendrometer measurement under outdoor conditions. For details 
please see the user manual of the DL18.  
 
Campbell Data Logger (CR1000) 
The dendrometer can be measured both in single-ended voltage as well as differential voltage 
mode. Differential voltage mode provides better accuracy. But single-ended mode requires half 
as many channels as differential mode. One CR1000 can include 16 dendrometers in single-
ended mode, but only 8 dendrometers in differential mode. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Single-ended Voltage 
Cable Color Input Port 
Yellow H (Signal, Vout +) 
Green GND 
Brown Vex 
White GND 
Black GND 
 
 Differential Voltage 
Cable Color Input Port 
Yellow H (Signal, Vout +) 
Green L  (Signal, Vout -) 
Brown Vex 
White GND 
Black GND 
 
Fruit Dendrometer – Type DF5                                                                             
        
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Single-ended Voltage Mode ( 2 dendrometers) 
 Connection 
Cable Color Input Port 
1st dendrometer Yellow 1H 
Green Ground 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
2nd dendrometer Yellow 1L 
Green Ground 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
Program Syntax 
ExciteV (Vx1,2500,0) 
VoltSe(SEVolt(),2,mV2500,1,True,0,_50Hz,Mult(),Offs()) 
If Multiplier=4.4, Offset=0, the results are measured in microns. 
 
Differential Voltage Mode ( 2 dendrometers) 
Connection 
Cable Color Input Port 
1st dendrometer Yellow 1H 
Green 1L 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
2nd dendrometer Yellow 2H 
Green 2L 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
Program Syntax 
ExciteV (Vx1,2500,0) 
VoltDiff(DiffVolt(),2,mV2500,1,True,0,_50Hz,Mult(),Offs()) 
If Multiplier=4.4, Offset=0, the results are measured in microns. 
An interval 0.5-hour for data collection can reveal the diurnal course of diameter changes very well. 
 
 
Sensor measurement value conversion: 
a) Converting raw voltage signal to current Sensor position, Xsensor  (mm):  
 Xsensor (mm) = Vout (V)/Vrvs (V)  * 11 mm 
 
b) Conversion of voltage output in mm fruit diameter:  
o  If final fruit diameter within maintenance-free diameter range 1 from  0 to 11 mm:  
Hook in start position at 0 distance between hook and sensor piston:  
 Fruit diameter, Dfruit (mm) = Xsensor (mm) 
 
 
Fruit Dendrometer – Type DF5                                                                             
        
 
 
 
5 
 
 
o If final fruit diameter exceeds maintenance free diameter range of 11 mm, reposition-
ing is required somewhat before reaching the end of the measurement range of 11 mm: 
 Diameter range from 0 to 11 mm, Fruit diameter, Dfruit_1 (mm): 
Dfruit= Xsensor_1 (mm)  
 
 Diameter range from 11 to 30 mm: Fruit diameter. 
In total repositioning may be required two to three times  to reach the maximum 
possible fruit diameter of 30 mm, the DF5 can be used for.  
For calculating absolute fruit size after repositioning the following formula applies: 
Dfruit = Xsensor_current (mm) – Xsensor_ini (mm) + Dfruit_prev (mm) 
 
Where Xsensor_current is the current sensor position at a certain time after repo-
sitioning, Xsensor_ini is the first valid reading of sensor position after repositioning 
(e.g. 3 mm sensor pressed in after repositioning) and Dfruit_prev (mm) is the last 
valid value of Dfruit_1 from measurements in range 1 before repositioning. 
 
EXAMPLE for fruit diameter calculation in diameter calculation after repositioning:  
- Last valid value of the fruit diameter Dfruit_1 from range 1 before repositioning: 10 mm 
- Initial first valid reading of sensor position Xsensor_ini (mm) after repositioning: 3 mm  
  (sensor pressed in 3 mm after repositioning)  
- New current reading Xsensor_current (mm)  after repositioning the sensor to range 2: 6 mm  
 Current absolute fruit size after repositioning is  
Dfruit = 6 mm – 3 mm + 10 mm = 13 mm 
 
 
6. Adjustment and maintenance  
The sensor is protected against water droplets but is not waterproof. 
Depending on th e growth rate of t he fruit, the sensor should be reset after some time. When 
the output approaches 11 mm, the sensor needs to be reset. 
To do so, relax the knurled-head screws and move the sensor body slowly along the slide rail, 
until the sensor rod is pushed out completely. Then slowly move the dendrometer body along 
the sliding rail  in the opposite direction, until the sensor rod is pushed in again by about 2-3 
mm and lock the dendrometer at the desired position by firmly tightening the two knurled-head 
nuts.  
When the se nsor is c orrectly insta lled, it will function un der outdoo r conditions without the 
need for further maintenance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fruit Dendrometer – Type DF5                                                                             
        
 
 
 
6 
 
7. Technical Specifications  
Name of the Sensor  Hook-mount fruit dendrometer small  
Type DF5 
Use area  For measuring small fruits 
Suitable for fruit size  Diameter 0-30 mm  
Range of the senor 11 mm   
Resolution The resolution of the sensor itself is infinite. The resolution of read-
ings is determined by connected data logger, e.g.  
CR1000: 1.5 µm 
Dendrometer logger DL18: 0.2 µm 
Accuracy Dendrometer dependent: 
Max. ±4.5% of reading (stable offset) 
 
Dependent on the connected data logger, e.g.:  
CR1000:±(0.04% of reading+4.4 µm) 
Dendrometer logger DL18: ±0.1% 
Temperature coefficient 
- Dendrometer 
 
<0.2 µm / °C in the whole range 
Linearity  <1% 
Environment   Outdoor condition: -25 to 70C air temperature, 0 to 100% relative 
air humidity   
Weight of the sensor  15 g without cable 
Power supply  Stabilized Vex of 0.5 – 10 VDC, power consumption practically 
zero 
Output signal (Vout) 0 to supplied Vex 
Material Stainless steel and Aluminium 
Cable length 5 m, extendable up to 100 m  
 
 