 
 
Dendrometer 
 
 ECOMATIK GmbH 
 Muenchner Str. 23 
 D-85221 Dachau/Germany 
 Tel.: +49  8131 260 738 
 Fax: +49  8131 260 736 
 e-mail: info@ecomatik.de 
 website: www.ecomatik.de 
 
 
 
 
Circumference Dendrometer (Type DC3) 
For measuring changes in the circumference of plant stems  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
User Manual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 2019 
 
 
 

DC3 Dendrometer                                                                                           
    
1  
 
1. Introduction 
Thank you for purchasing an Ecomatik Dendrometer type DC3. This is a highly precise 
sensor for the continuous measurements of changes in the circumference of plant stems, 
under both indoor and outdoor conditions. 
This manual is written to help you install and operate your DC3 Dendrometer without diffi-
culty and for the most desirable results. Please read it carefully before installing the sen-
sor, and refer back to it if you should have any difficulty with the sensor in the future. 
The dendrometer is the sensor part of the measuring system. This means that the den-
drometer must be installed onto the experimental tree, and connected to a data logger for 
continuous data recording. The dendrometer is compatible with most data loggers. At 
Ecomatik a low-cost, specially developed dendrometer data logger DL18 is also available. 
 
2. Product Description  
As shown blow, a standard version of the DC3 dendrometer consists of: 
1 Sensor with 5 m cable. The cable length can be extended up to 100 m 
1 m special wire for receiving the circumference changes. The wire length can be ex-
tended to several meters.  
1 special wire rope clamp to fix the stem embracing wire  
1 bag of plastic slides for reducing the friction between the steel wire and the measured 
plant stem. 
2 m perforated rubber belt for fixing the sensor onto the tree. 
 
DC3 Dendrometer 
Please contact us should you miss anything of these items. 
The standard cable length is 5 m. if you ordered cable extension, the cable length is the 
ordered extension + 5 m. 
To meet the requirements of different loggers, there are 2 different types of cables: cable 
with plug and cable without plug. Cable with plug can only be connected to Dendrome-
ter Logger DL18. Cable without plug can be connected to other loggers. 
 
 

DC3 Dendrometer                                                                                           
    
2  
 
3. Safety Information  
The sensor is protected from water droplets, but it is not waterproof, therefore please do 
not immerse the sensor in water, or install the sensor below a longer lasting snow cover. 
For a high degree of measurement accuracy, it is very important to keep the original 
shape of the wire cable. Please handle it with care and avoid any distortion (turning, bend-
ing etc.) 
Never pull the cable from the sensor and avoid any tension between the cable and sensor 
during handling, set up and operation. 
Pay attention to connections to data logger. Wrong connections will provide wrong read-
ings. 
 
4. Installation  
4.1 Required tools 
Screw driver, measuring tape, a pair of scissors. 
4.2 Choosing the measuring tree 
The data processing of the DC3 dendrometer is based on a tree with a trunk of a circular 
cross-section. For this reason it is very important, to choose a smoothly circular tree for 
measurement with DC3 dendrometer. 
4.3 Mounting 
4.3.1 Cut two rubber belts as long as the tree circumference.  
4.3.2 Attach one end of each of the two perforated rubber belts to the fixation bolts at the 
back-side bar of the dendrometer frame. 
   4.3.3 Firmly fix the dendrometer at the stem, by tightly wrapping the rubber belts around the 
stem/branch and locking them again by slipping the desired hole of each belt on the 
corresponding bolt at the back-side bar (see picture 1).  
4.3.4 Unroll the wire from the reel and untighten the wire rope clamp by turning the two 
screws of the clamp (please do not disassemble the clamp completely). Thread a 
certain number (dependent on the tree circumference) of the provided plastic slides 
on the wire. Next insert the end of the wire through the sensor hole. Finally pass the 
prepared wire around the tree trunk, and pass it through the rope clamp (picture 2).  
 
    
Picture 1                                             Picture 2 
 
 

DC3 Dendrometer                                                                                           
    
3  
 
Pull the wire such, that the sensor rod is pushed in by about 2-3 mm. When the in-
stallation is taking place before frost period, the sensor rod should be pushed in by 7 
mm. At frosts the stem diameter can shrink considerably. When reached the desired 
rod position firmly tighten the clamp by fastening the two clamp screws. 
4.3.5 Ensure that the wire lies flat around the stem, and move the plastic slides along the 
wire so that the wire itself does not touch the bark. 
4.3.6 Fix the cable onto the tree stem/branch so that the sensor is protected from any ac-
cidental pull/ drag of the entire cable length. This can be done using a rope or cable 
straps. In addition, there should be no tension between the sensor and cable. En-
sure that no rain water can run along the cable into the sensor casing. 
4.4 Collecting the Initial Data  
For data processing, after the installation the following initial data should be collected: 
c0: Circumference of tree at the height of dendrometer in mm. 
 
5. Wiring and Logger Configuration 
The dendrometer is compatible with most data loggers. In the following we describe the 
connection with Dendrometer Logger (DL18), Campbell Logger (CR1000). Please contact 
us if your logger is not described here. 
Dendrometer Data Logger (DL18) 
The DL18 is a battery powered, waterproof logger for connecting 4 dendrometers. It is a 
very effective data logger for dendrometer measurement under outdoor conditions. For 
details please see the user manual of the DL18.  
Campbell Data Logger (CR1000) 
The dendrometer can be measured both in single-ended voltage as well as differential 
voltage mode. Differential voltage mode provides better accuracy. But single-ended mode 
requires half as many channels as differential mode. One CR1000 can include 16 den-
drometers in single-ended mode, but only 8 dendrometers in differential mode. 
 
Single-ended Voltage Mode ( 2 dendrometers) 
Connection 
Cable Color Input Port 
1st dendrometer Yellow 1H 
Green Ground 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
2nd dendrometer Yellow 1L 
Green Ground 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
Program Syntax 
ExciteV (Vx1,2500,0) 
VoltSe(SEVolt(),2,mV2500,1,True,0,_50Hz,Mult(),Offs()) 
If Multiplier=10.16, Offset=0, the results are measured in microns. 
DC3 Dendrometer                                                                                           
    
4  
 
Differential Voltage Mode ( 2 dendrometers) 
Connection 
Cable Color Input Port 
1st dendrometer Yellow 1H 
Green 1L 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
2nd dendrometer Yellow 2H 
Green 2L 
Brown Vx1 
White Ground 
Program Syntax 
ExciteV (Vx1,2500,0) 
VoltDiff(DiffVolt(),2,mV2500,1,True,0,_50Hz,Mult(),Offs()) 
If Multiplier=10.16, Offset=0, the results are measured in microns. 
 
An interval 0.5-hour for data collection can reveal the diurnal course of diameter changes 
very well. 
 
6. Data Calculation 
For calculating the tree circumference Ci (Ri =Ci/π/2) the following parameters are neces-
sary: 
C0 : Circumference of tree at the height of dendrometer in mm at beginning of  
       the measurement R0=C0/π/2 
Vi : Data records of the dendrometer in mm. 
V0 : the first valid record of the dendrometer in mm. 
 
The tree circumference ci is given by:  
               𝑪𝒊 = 𝟐 × (𝝅 × 𝑹𝟎 − 𝑹𝟎 × 𝒂𝒓𝒄𝒄𝒐𝒔(
𝑹𝟎
𝑹𝟎+𝟏𝟐𝟖−𝑽𝟎
) +√(𝑹𝟎 + 𝟏𝟐𝟖 − 𝑽𝟎)𝟐 − 𝑹𝟎
𝟐  
        +𝑹𝒊−𝟏 × 𝒂𝒓𝒄𝒄𝒐𝒔( 𝑹𝒊−𝟏
𝑹𝒊−𝟏 + 𝟏𝟐𝟖 − 𝑽𝒊
) -√(𝑹𝒊−𝟏 + 𝟏𝟐𝟖 − 𝑽𝒊)𝟐 − 𝑹𝒊−𝟏
𝟐) 
 
arccos: Arccosine in rad. 
 
A simple program in EXCEL for this formula is available. Please contact us for a copy. 
 
7. Adjustment and maintenance  
Ensure that no falling branches, fruits or snow land on the sensor. The sensor is protected 
against water droplets but is not waterproof. 
When the sensor is correctly installed, it will function under outdoor conditions without the 
need for further maintenance.  
 
DC3 Dendrometer                                                                                           
    
5  
 
Depending on the growth rate of the tree, the sensor should be reset after some months 
or years of measurements. When the output approaches 25 mm, the sensor needs to be 
reset. 
Relax the turnbuckle / screw slowly so that the sensor rod is pushed in by about 2-3 mm. 
When the reset is taking place before frost period, the sensor rod should be pushed in by 
8 mm. At frosts the stem diameter can shrink considerably. 
 
8. Technical Specifications  
Name of the Sensor  Circumference Dendrometer 3 
Type DC3 
Use area  For measuring circumference growth of fast-growing trees 
Suitable for plant size  Diameter:  >5 cm  
Advantages  Mechanical pressure on the tree is independent from the tree size, 
thus good comparability of data between different tree sizes. 
Range of the senor 25.4 mm, corresponding range for tree size: 
   Tree diameter                   Range of mm 
        (cm)                  Circumference    Diameter 
         10                           50                     16,2 
         50                           35                     11,3 
        100                          28                       9,0 
Resolution The resolution of the sensor itself is infinite. The resolution of read-
ings is determined by connected data logger, e.g.  
CR1000: 3.3 µm 
Dendrometer logger (DL18): 0.5 µm 
Accuracy Dendrometer dependent: 
Max. ±1.97% of reading (stable offset) 
 
Dependent on the connected data logger, e.g.:  
CR1000:±(0.04% of reading+10 µm) 
Dendrometer logger DL18: ±0.1% 
Temperature coeffi-
cient of the sensor  <0.2 µm /°C in the whole range 
Temperature coeffi-
cient of the wire cable <1.4 ×10-6/k 
Linearity  <0,7% 
Environment   Outdoor condition: -25 to 70C air temperature, 0 to 100% relative air 
humidity   
Weight of the sensor  37 g without cable 
Power supply  Stabilized Vex of 0.5 – 10 VDC, power consumption practically zero 
Material Stainless steel and Aluminium 
Cable length 5 m, extendable up to 100 m  
 