HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
 
Tubular soil sensor 
Product instruction manual  

HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
 
Four layer tube moisture dimension chart 
1. Scope of application 
Tubular soil sensor is a newly developed product of our company . This 
sensor adopts high -precision chip and advanced algorithm as well as IOT 
technology, which can measure multi-depth soil parameters, RS485 output or 
4G network uploaded to the data center. 
The product can be widely used in real-time monitoring of soil temperature 
and humidity in farmland, forest area, grassland and irrigation area. It can also 
be used in water conservancy and land disaster industries to provide data 
support for monitoring natural disasters such as landslides and debris flows. 
 

HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
2. Functional Features 
➢ The product is designed to be flexible and can measure the 
temperature and humidity of the soil at any depth between 10-80cm (generally 
10cm layer). Default for 4 layer, 5 layer, 8 layer standard tube. Support 
customization. 
➢ It consists of sensing, collecting, transmitting and power supplying parts, 
and is an integrated design for easy installation. 
➢ With domestic version, international version of the data transmission 
program, convenient for users outside the mainland. (Please inform the sales 
staff in advance of the international version) 
➢ The collector configuration software adopts WeChat applet to connect 
with cell phone through Bluetooth, which can be used to manipulate the device 
in any Android or Apple cell phone end equipped with WeChat APP, and realize 
the deep interaction, configuration and remote sending between cell phone APP 
and the device. (Some functions are currently open to users) 
➢ Sensor built -in high -efficiency lithium battery, RTU with low -power 
consumption design, fully charged state in the case of continuous rainy days 
can work for more than 180 days. 
➢ Adopt magnetic switch design, can be used with the magnet supplied 
with the collector for switching control. Prevent the station in the field occurs 
human error shutdown situation. 
➢ Adopting cloud platform storage technology, the data sent each time 
can be saved to the autonomous cloud platform or the third-party platform that 
meets the Hydrological Monitoring Data Communication Statute SL651 -2014. 
It supports MQTT service docking to the third -party platform, and supports 
protocol customization. Default API interface docking. 
➢ Other features: battery indicator, network location. 
➢ Expandable elements: GPS positioning for more accurate positioning . 
Expandable parameters such as temperature, humidity, air pressure, dew point 
HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
temperature and body temperature. 
➢ Expandable function: open the user’s secondary calibration function 
(function of cubic term + quadratic term + primary term + constant), providing 
more accurate data for professional researchers. Users can provide data, our 
company to assist the coefficient calculation of the function. 
3. Technical Parameters 
Measured parameter: volumetric soil water content (soil moisture) 
➢ Unit: % (m³/m³), or %Vol (volumetric water content) 
➢ Humidity range: 0~100%Vol; Resolution:0.01%Vol 
➢ Accuracy: ≤3% Vol within the valid range 
➢ Measuring area: 90% of the influence is within the cylindrical measuring 
carrier with a diameter of 10 cm around the sensor 
➢ Precision drift: none 
➢ Probability of linear dispersion deviation of the sensor: 1%. 
Measured parameters: soil temperature 
➢ Soil temperature range: -40~+60℃; Resolution:0.01℃. 
➢ Accuracy: ±0.5℃  
➢ Stabilization time: approx 1 second after power-on 
➢ Response time: Response goes to steady state within 1 second 
➢ Sensor operating voltage: sensor input 5-24V DC 
➢ Sensor operating current: quiescent current 4mA, acquisition current 
35mA 
➢ Sensor waterproof level: IP68 
➢ Working Temperature: -40℃~+80℃ 
➢ RTU power consumption: standby 10μAh, transmission 100mAh. 
➢ Transmission: default 4G output to own platform. Optional RS485 and 
other outputs, optional third-party docking. 
➢ Actual power supply capacity of solar panel: ≤0.6W 
➢ RS485 output power supply: DC5-24V, current less than 25mA. 
4. Device Communication Protocols and Wiring 
➢ Hydrological Monitoring Data Communication Statute SL651 -2014; 
TCP protocol; other third-party customized protocols, MQTT, API interfaces, etc. 
➢ The RTU and the sensing part are connected by internal cables. The 
HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
IoT card costs 3 years (one year for the international version). 
➢ Solar panel Internal wiring of lithium batteries for power. 
5. Selection of collection sites 
The selection of representative plots for moisture monitoring should take 
into account their geomorphology, soil, meteorological and hydrogeological 
conditions, as well as the representativeness of species and plants. The scope 
of collection can be based on the county level, and a few representative areas 
can be selected at the county level (the reference basis for representativeness 
can be based on the categories of landforms and the extent of the areas of 
priority crops). 
If you are located in a hilly area, you should set the testing point in a plot 
with a small slope ratio drop and a large area, and you should not collect in the 
bottom of a ditch or in a plot with a large slope. 
Representative plots in plain areas should be collected on flat and non 
waterlogging plots 
Detailed collection plots should be more than 10 meters away from the edge 
of representative plots, roadsides and in level plots, avoiding low -lying places 
prone to waterlogging plots, and maintaining a distance of more than 20 meters 
from ditches and flood channels to avoid the impact of seepage of water from 
ditches on soil water content. 
For the collection of plots within the hydrological station, it is strictly 
forbidden to be in the middle of the vegetable field within the station to avoid 
the impact of watering on the collection accuracy. It is recommended to choose 
the collection point in a more open location, not close to houses or fences; 
6. Sensor installation and data reporting 
6.1 Installation Precautions 
（1） Observe the data through the platform and confirm that the data is normal. 
（2） Preparation of tools for installation (basin, water, shovel (or earth auger), 
sieve with 2-4 mm aperture) 
HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
（3） Holes shall be punched vertically downward; 
（4） Drill holes to a suitable depth and note if there are more stones . There 
are many stones and it is recommended to relocate;  
（5） Backfill the mud and insert the sensor vertically. (very important and 
fundamental to the accuracy of the response data);  
（6） Verify that the sensor is mounted at a depth where the horizon is level 
with the ground. 
6.2 Sensor Installation 
（1） Select a more level installation location and make a hole in the ground 
directly with an earth auger: 
（2） Remove the blue tube cap from the bottom of the tube test soil auger to 
take out the handles, and screw the two handles into the ends of the pair of 
wires in a clockwise direction; as shown below: 
 
（3） Insert the pipe soil auger vertically along the center hole of the flange, 
press down with appropriate force. At the same time, rotate both hands left and 
right parallel to each other until it reaches the required depth (this process can 
feel whether there are stones in the soil, and if there are too many stones, you 
need to re -select the site), and in the process of punching, every maximum 
depth of 10cm, you need to raise the soil auger to fling the soil out of the pipe 
with force, and you can also use the extended screwdriver to take the hammer 
(can not use the hammer to hit the pipe body, so as not to cause deformation 
of the pipe body) to knock the lower part of the soil auger pipe body to vibrate 
the soil out or from the bottom of the screwdriver to dig the soil until all the soil 

HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
falls, with a ruler to measure the depth of the hole should be deeper than the 
sensor's measurement of the depth of 7-8cm; the following figure: 
 
（4） The soil removed from the perforations is sieved and made into a slurry; 
as follows: 
 
（5） Fill the drilled hole with slurry to a depth of at least 2/3 of the hole, as 
shown below. 

HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
 
（6） Simply insert the sensor into the backfilled mud ground hole with the 
sensor labeled with the horizon line flush with the ground. Figure below: 
 
6.3 Voice recognition of the collector 
“Beep” for power on; 
Two “beeps” means it is off; 
7. System setup, data reporting, data queries 
7.1 Equipment switching and configuration 
（1） Scan the QR code with your cell phone to see the data, and use the 
magnetic peg to power up the sensor (the default state of power on in China, 
restart after brushing the magnetic, power on the data). 
（2） If you need to configure, you can enter the small program after clicking 

HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
on the “click to connect Bluetooth” 2 seconds after the interface will appear in 
the lower part of the button, click on the button will prompt the “connection is 
successful”, (this feature has the option to open, generally configured in 
accordance with the user’s requirements before leaving the factory) 
7.2 Data reporting 
Each time the sensor is turned on, the RTU automatically reports a test 
message to the receiving center. After the initial installation is completed, the 
sensor can be turned on for about 1 minute to view the last reported data. 
7.3 Platform operation and data query 
You can log in to the platform to view real-time data, historical records, 
data export and more. 
8. Problem Determination and Solution 
Description of the 
problem 
Solutions 
1. No start-up beep 
⚫ Go to a sunny spot to light the solar panel and charge the 
sensor for at least one day; 
⚫ After charging, it still can not be turned on.It can be 
returned to the factory for inspection and repair. 
2. Unable to collect 
data 
⚫ Whether the sensor has been inserted into the soil or is in 
the measurement carrier; 
⚫ If the cause cannot be determined, it can be returned to the 
factory for inspection and repair. 
3. Inability to report 
data 
(No communication) 
⚫ Check whether the cell phone has a signal, if it is in the 
state of no signal RTU can not report data; 
⚫ It can be returned to the factory for service after ruling out 
other causes; 
⚫ No communication for RS485 version. Check that the 
power supply and RS485 wiring, communication 
parameters are configured correctly and communication 
commands are sent correctly. 
Note: This hardware and WeChat small program, PC may be updated at any time, if no 
HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
special circumstances without notice! 
Selection List: 
HCS Series Catheterized Soil Senosr 
Selection table 
Serial number Name Model number Output Note 
1 Conduit soil monitor HCS-4 RS485 5 Meter Cable 
2 Conduit soil monitor HCS-5 RS485 5 Meter Cable 
3 Conduit soil monitor HCS-8 RS485 5 Meter Cable 
4 Conduit soil monitor HCS-4/G 4G 3-year flow 
5 Conduit soil monitor HCS-5/G 4G 3-year flow 
6 Conduit soil monitor HCS-8/G 4G 3-year flow 
Note: Standard 10cm layer, customized protocols and customized layers are 
available. 
Modbus RTU communication protocol 
MODBUS RTU communication protocol (for Catheterized Soil Moisture 
Sensor. Protocol supports customization.) 
Baud rate: 9600;  Data bits: 8;  Stop bits: 1;  Parity bit: none 
CRC Notes: 
In all the following descriptions, the two bytes of CRC16 in the MODBUS 
RTU protocol, according to MODBUS regulations: the low byte comes first and 
the high byte comes second. 
1. Return error code provisions: 
The sensor does not return the error code for the reception of error 
commands (including CRC16 validation errors). The host computer can 
consider that the instruction has failed when no return data is received 100ms 
after the instruction is issued, and can resend the instruction. 
2. Standard MODBUS Register Description 
Special Note: The number or length of registers in MODBUS commands 
are in two-byte 16-bit units (high byte first, low byte second), not single-byte 8-
bit units. 
The user should ensure that the range of the two parameters, address and 
number of registers in the command is within the range specified by the system. 
If they are out of range, the sensor output results will be unpredictable. The 
user should ensure that the MODBUS commands comply with the requirements 
of this manual in the design of the host computer software. 
3. Internal registers: read with function code 03; write with function code 06. 
HONDE TECHNOLOGY CO,LTD 
http://www.hondetechco.com/ 
Order Register 
address Parameter description Note 
 Ox0100 Device address, default ox01. fill out or in 
(information on a form) 
1 layer 
ox0020 
Soil volumetric water content 1 layer (10 cm 
depth). 
A hexadecimal number magnified 100 times, 
e.g. 0x08D0 means 2256/100=22.56%Vol 
read-only 
ox0021 
Soil temperature 1 layer, (10cm depth), 
magnified 100 times hexadecimal number, e.g. 
0x08D0 indicates 2256/100 = 22.56° C. 
Negative numbers are expressed as 
complements. 
read-only 
2 layer ox0022 Soil moisture content by volume2 read-only 
ox0023 Soil temperature2 read-only 
3 layer ox0024 Soil moisture content by volume3 read-only 
ox0025 Soil temperature 3 read-only 
4 layer ox0026 Soil moisture content by volume4 read-only 
ox0027 Soil temperature 4 read-only 
5 layer ox0028 Soil moisture content by volume 5 read-only 
ox0029 Soil temperature 5 read-only 
6 layer 
ox002A Soil moisture content by volume6 read-only 
ox002B Soil temperature 6 read-only 
7 layer ox002C Soil moisture content by volume 7 read-only 
ox002D Soil temperature 7 read-only 
8 layer ox002E Soil moisture content by volume 8 read-only 
ox002F Soil temperature 8 read-only 
Note: Address data is represented in hexadecimal . For example: address 20 (decimal) 
read/write value is 0x14. 